---
layout: default
title: Cardano SL Updater
permalink: /technical/updater/
group: technical
visible: true
---
[//]: # (Reviewed at ac0126b2753f1f5ca6fbfb555783fbeb1aa141bd)
[//]: # (Updated at 6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83)

# Implementation Overview

Implementation of the update system can be found in the
[Pos.Update](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/tree/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update)
family of modules. The general approach to implementation is the same as
in other subsystems of CSL, such as Txp, Ssc and Delegation. The update
system has the global state, stored in the database. The global state can be
unambiguously derived from the information that is in the blockchain. The local
state, sometimes referred to as “mempool”, is stored in the memory.
The mempool is used for data transfer and inclusion of transferred data into
blocks. The network protocol (built with standard
[Inv/Req/Data pattern](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/tree/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/infra/Pos/Communication/Relay))
is described in
[Application-level document](/technical/protocols/csl-application-level/)
with the binary protocol described in
[Binary protocols document](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/).

Currently, everything is ready to add hard fork functionality via
software update and then perform a hard fork as described in research
section; soft forks (or software updates) are fully implemented.

## Fields Updatable with a Soft Fork

An
[UpdateProposal](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs#L99-L109) contains
fields for changing some parameters used by Cardano SL (for instance, slot
duration). Specifically, `upBlockVersion` is used to signify that a proposal
performs such changes; if `upBlockVersion` is greater than the last used
block version, the changes from `upBlockVersionData` will be applied.

`upBlockVersionData` has the type
[BlockVersionData](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs#L135-L149).
Its fields are described below:

  * `bvdScriptVersion` – a script language version used to validate script
    transactions. If the proposal increases `upBlockVersion`, it must also
    increase `bvdScriptVersion` by 1 (and can't leave it unchanged).

  * `bvdSlotDuration` – slot duration (in milliseconds).

  * `bvdMaxBlockSize` – block size limit (in bytes). A proposal can't
    increase the block size limit more than twofold compared to the previous
    limit.

  * `bvdMaxTxSize` – transaction size limit
    (in bytes, [currently 4096](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/core/constants-prod.yaml#L9)),
    limits size of [TxAux](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/#transaction-auxilary)

The checks described above are made
in
[verifyNextBVData](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Poll/Logic/Base.hs#L231).
In addition, there are some fields that are unused right now, but will be used
in the future. Their meaning is briefly described below:


  * `bvdMpcThd` – eligibility threshold for MPC.

  * `bvdHeavyDelThd` – threshold for heavyweight delegation.

  * `bvdUpdateVoteThd` – portion of total stake necessary to vote for or
    against an update.

  * `bvdUpdateProposalThd` – portion of total stake such that block containing
    `UpdateProposal` must contain positive votes for this proposal
    from stakeholders owning at least this amount of stake.

  * `bvdUpdateImplicit` – number of slots after which an update is implicitly
    approved (unless it has more negative votes than positive).

  * `bvdUpdateSoftforkThd` – portion of total stake such that if total stake
    of issuers of blocks with some block version is bigger than this portion,
    this block version is adopted.

## Mempool Structure

`MemPool` consists of votes and proposals. Apart from that `MemState` contains tip,
slot and `PollModifier` corresponding to `MemPool` (and to current `GState`, i. e.
to application of `MemPool` to `GState`). No matter whether a change in
proposal state comes from the network/mempool, or from loading
the blockchain, `PollModifier` represents
modification of global state which will be made if one applies mempool.

### Updating the Mempool

As nodes deserialize
[payloads of update system messages](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/#update-system),
they modify mempool as implemented
[here](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/MemState/Functions.hs#L29).

`MemPool` is updated in three cases:

  1. **When a new proposal/vote is received**. In this case, one of the
  [process*](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Logic/Local.hs#L94)
  functions is called, which in turn calls
  [verifyAndApplyUSPayload](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Poll/Logic/Apply.hs#L63)
  and then updates current `PollModifier` and `MemPool`.
  2. **When a new slot starts**. In this case some data in `MemPool` may become invalid.
  In fact, it happens only when epoch changes. That can happen because stable stake distribution
  changes and some votes may have not enough stake for inclusion.
  It's done in
  the [processNewSlot](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Logic/Local.hs#L208)
  function.
  3. **When `GState` is updated**. It is called
  [usNormalize](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Logic/Local.hs#L177).
  Some data may become invalid as a result of block(s) application or rollback. For instance,
  we have a proposal in memory, apply block with this proposal and it becomes invalid
  (because it's already in block). We should drop such proposals. Or we have a vote for
  proposal from some block, then rollback of this block happens and vote is no
  longer valid. It is implemented by applying all local data to empty state, ignoring
  all data which is no longer valid.

### Proposal and Votes Accumulation

To vote for a proposal, nodes should send their
[votes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs#L242-L253).
Proposals and votes are stored in mempool (even if proposals don't have enough
votes for inclusion into blocks, this way votes can be collected automatically)
or gathered from the blockchain in order to figure out which proposal is adopted.

## Interaction With the Database

In order to verify update system data, we have to get this data from the
global state (database). To provide such interface, a well-documented type class
[MonadPollRead](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Poll/Class.hs#L30)
is presented. This type class is used not only for DB interaction, but also to
take mempool into account when the data received from the network are processed.
It is important that its implementation relies on functions found in
[Pos.Update.DB](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/DB.hs).

## Core Types

Core types are mentioned in the Binary protocols document. Those types
reflect the concepts from the research section in a straightforward way.
Please refer to the
[core types module](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs)
for more information.

## Update Proposal Approval

A very important part of implementation of the update mechanism is
the part that works with genesis blocks for epochs.
This logic resides
[in this well-documented function](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Poll/Logic/Softfork.hs#L68).
The terminology related to this process is explained below.

### Threshold

Suppose there is a block version `X`. And there are blocks with version `X`
created in slots `S` (`S` is a set of slots). If total relative stake of
leaders of all slots in `S` is ≥ `softforkResolutionThreshold`
(referred to as «threshold» in the code), then `X` becomes adopted.
See the more detailed description in [research overview](cardano/update-mechanism/#soft-fork-updates).

### Proposal states

Update proposal can be in one of the states described below.

#### Undecided

It means that update proposal is contained in
one of the blocks, but it doesn't have `50%` votes for/against it (here `50%` means total
stake of voters who are for/against proposal relative to total stake of all stakeholders
in system) and implicit agreement rule hasn't been triggered yet.

[//]: TODO: **Important remark:** when we are talking about stake, we need to be clear about
[//]: TODO: which stake distribution we are talking about. For each epoch we know stable distribution
[//]: TODO: for this epoch. It used in leaders selection (follow-the-satoshi) and also in many other
[//]: TODO: cases. Stable distribution is distribution as it was ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠2k﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ slots before the end of epoch.
[//]: TODO: To calculate stake of votes for proposal ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠p﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ we use stake distribution as per epoch in
[//]: TODO: which ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠p﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ was added to blocks. I. e. distribution which was ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠2k﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ slots before the
[//]: TODO: end of that epoch. This ensures that nobody can transfer his funds to another address
[//]: TODO: and vote from that address to increase total stake of voters.
[//]: TODO:
[//]: TODO: **Another important remark:** when we are talking about stake, it's also important to be
[//]: TODO: clear whether we consider delegated stake. I. e. if Alice delegated to Bob, do we consider
[//]: TODO: that Alice's funds belong to Bob or Alice? When we use stake for votes, we consider delegated
[//]: TODO: stake, i. e. we consider that Alice's funds belong to Bob. Note that here we consider
[//]: TODO: only heavyweight delegation. I hope it's covered in documentation, but I am not sure.

#### Approved

It means that proposal has more than `50%` votes for it or it was added to block long ago
(according to implicit agreement rule) and it has more positive votes than negative
(comparison by stake of course).

#### Rejected

A proposal is called **rejected** if that proposal has more than `50%` votes against it or
it was added to block long ago (according to implicit agreement rule) and it has more
negative votes than positive (again, comparison by stake).

#### Confirmed

An **approved** proposal is called **confirmed** if at least `k` blocks ago proposal
became **Approved**. At this point we can be sure that proposal won't become **rejected**,
because rollbacks with depth more than `k` aren't possible.

#### Discarded

A **rejected** proposal is called **discarded**, if at least `k` blocks ago that proposal
became **Rejected**. At this point we can be sure that proposal won't be approved,
because rollbacks with depth more than `k` aren't possible.

## Download New Version

In the
[Pos.Update.Download](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Download.hs)
module, the following algorithms are implemented. Downloaded updates are
applied using a tool called
[launcher](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/launcher/Main.hs).

### Download Confirmed Update

To download a confirmed update, we extract the update hash from
`ConfirmedProposalState`. It is extracted depending on whether or not we're
using an installer on given platform. If the update hash is extracted
successfully, the “Download Update by Hash” algorithm is invoked to download and save the confirmed update.

### Download Update by Hash

To download an update by hash, we loop through known update servers trying
to download the update with given hash using `httpLBS` from HTTP. It's simple: in
the end, we will either have the update completely downloaded or server list
exhausted and an error reported.
