---
layout: default
title: Cardano SL Wallet
permalink: /technical/wallet/
group: technical
visible: true
---
[//]: # (Reviewed at ac0126b2753f1f5ca6fbfb555783fbeb1aa141bd)

# Wallets in Cardano SL

While addresses discussed in [Addresses](/cardano/addresses/) section are
fundamental to send and receive funds, wallets are a way to simplify these
processes for end-users.

## What is a Wallet?

In Cardano, wallets are defined in the following manner:

~~~ haskell
data CWallet = CWallet
    { cwAddress :: !CAddress
    , cwAmount  :: !Coin
    , cwMeta    :: !CWalletMeta
    }
~~~

where `CWalletMeta` is a type that presently indicates whether the wallet is
shared or personal, the currency that this wallet uses, and the wallet's name.
With this, the wallet type is easily extensible, as any additional features can
be added to the `CWalletMeta` type, leaving the `Address` and `Coin` fields
untouched. (Every wallet, regardless of name, type and currency, must
have the said fields.)

## Transactions and Wallets

In the [Transactions](/cardano/transactions/) section, the structure of
transactions is defined. However, to facilitate client operations, transactions
are represented differently in clients. They are represented as

~~~ haskell
data CTx = CTx
    { ctId            :: CTxId
    , ctAmount        :: Coin
    , ctConfirmations :: Word
    , ctType          :: CTType -- it includes all "meta data"
    }
~~~

Essentially, a client transaction is composed by the actual transaction `Id`,
by the amount the wallet in question received, the number of confirmations this
transaction has received (i.e., the number of blocks that are currently on top of the
block containing the transaction in question), and a label indicating whether
the transaction is incoming or outcoming. Inside the `CTType` datatype, there
is, similarly to `CWallet`, a datatype with meta-information concerning the
transaction. Aside from a label indicating whether it is ingoing or outgoing,
this meta-information - the datatype `CTxMeta` - indicates the transaction's
currency, its title or name, its description and the POSIX-formatted date of
sending it.

## Wallet Backend API

Currently, the wallet's API provides a series of methods to work
with wallets. The `servant` Haskell library that provides a modular
approach to API-building is used. This library uses combinators both to build atomic HTTP actions and to glue these atomic methods together to form larger and more
complete APIs.

If the event requests fail, there is a `WalletError` type, which
is simply a wrapper over `Text` to show what happened.

Documentation for wallet web API is available [here](https://cardano-docs.iohk.io/technical/wallet/api/).

Please notice that wallet web API is available only if you run a node with `--wallet` option. Default port for this API is `8090`.
