---
layout: default
title: Introduction
permalink: /introduction/
group: base
anchors:
  Cryptocurrency Basics: cryptocurrency-basics
  What Makes Cardano SL Special?: what-makes-cardano-sl-special
  Beyond Settlement Layer: beyond-settlement-layer
---

[//]: # (Reviewed at 42f226733a3d0e92af736f076a9fb1a7388d8da1)

Dear reader, the purpose of this documentation is to provide you with
understanding of the first layer of Cardano Platform stack — the
Settlement Layer. If you have an understanding of what Settlement Layer
is, we suggest you first read
[Differences Between the Paper and the Implementation](/cardano/differences/)
and then move on to
[documentation on protocols and implementation](/technical/protocols/csl-application-level/).

This documentation targets IOHK developers, third-party software
developers, auditors, and consultants who collaborate on
implementing Cardano Settlement Layer or use Cardano Settlement Layer
reference implementation.

Cardano SL (or Cardano Settlement Layer) is a cryptographic
currency designed and developed by [IOHK](https://iohk.io/team). You can
think of this product as Bitcoin reimagined with a freedom to fix
Bitcoin's design flaws. For those who don't know what Bitcoin is, in the
[next section](#cryptocurrency-basics) we'll talk a little bit about what
a cryptocurrency is and why do cryptocurrencies matter.
If you have basic understanding of Bitcoin, you may
[skip](#what-makes-cardano-sl-special) the next
section. If you're eager to start working with Cardano SL, refer to the
[Installation Guide](/installation/) to get started.

## Cryptocurrency Basics

Before giving a definition of a cryptocurrency, let's talk about
why we care about digital currencies in general and cryptographic
currencies in particular.

### Why Do We Care?

#### Speed

As opposed to conventional (also known as fiat), centrally banked
currencies such as the Yen or the American Dollar, digital currencies do not
require a banking system to move value. With this restriction lifted,
working with digital currencies is much faster than working with banking,
especially on a global scale. The transfer of 10 USD from Osaka to Denver
no longer takes days when a digital currency is used.
All transactions are made rapidly regardless of the distance. The
transfer also follows the same understandable rules within a
predictable amount of time, ensuring speed and reliability.

#### You Own Your Money
All that a commercial bank account owner is given is a promise of
being paid a certain amount of money within a reasonable amount of
time after receiving a payout request. Banking systems also have limits to
any volume of value being moved, rendering an individual unable to withdraw
or transfer large amounts quickly. In case of cryptocurrencies, the person
who holds a special kind of information called _a secret key_ can spend
the money at will. No other entity has a power to manipulate the value that
a user owns.

#### Pseudonymity

One can have as many cryptocurrency addresses as they wish, receiving
and spending money from different addresses as per their purpose. A
merchant running an E-Commerce shop can have a set of addresses to
receive money and issue refunds, and a personal "wallet" for their own
needs. A single interface is used to control all of these wallets, and
there is no need to log in to several payment platforms, which makes the
process very time efficient.

#### Security

Your money is as secure as the _secret key_ that allows spending it.
This means that storing your secret key on a USB flash drive in a safe
is equivalent to having banknotes in a safe. Absolutely nobody can steal this
money even by carrying out a successful cyber-attack.

#### Extensibility

Using an approach known as
[_side chains_](https://www.blockstream.com/sidechains.pdf), general-purpose
cryptocurrencies such as Cardano SL or Bitcoin can enable
domain-specific cryptocurrencies, such as Ethereum Classic. This way,
any innovation developed via domain-specific cryptocurrency can have
participants who hold value in a general-purpose cryptocurrency.
Examples of such applications are identity management, gaming and gambling,
and verifiable computations.

### What is a Cryptocurrency?

Cryptocurrency is a form of digital currency that uses cryptography to
manipulate value. Cryptography provides a way to generate
proof of genuine authenticity of any kind of information. This is called
_digital signing_. In cryptocurrencies we generate a ledger (a database
which provides information on how much money each address has) by signing
and sending transactions to the network and receiving blocks of
confirmed transactions. Cryptocurrencies are normally decentralized,
meaning that many people from all over the globe participate in
ledger generation by running cryptocurrency nodes. Thus, a consensus
about the state of the ledger has to be achieved. Two most significant
approaches for achieving such consensus are discussed in the next section.

## What Makes Cardano SL Special?

[//]: # (v0.1.0.0)

While there are similarities between Bitcoin and Cardano SL, there are
also many differences between these two cryptocurrencies.
The most significant difference is that Bitcoin is a Proof of Work type
cryptocurrency, while Cardano SL makes use of a Proof of Stake approach
to reach consensus. This encourages honesty and long-term participation.

### Purpose of a Consensus Algorithm

Consensus algorithms are used to produce new transaction blocks,
resulting in an updated state of the ledger. Whenever someone publishes
a block of transactions, they — or rather, their node that runs the
cryptocurrency protocol — have to attach a proof that they have merited
it. Below two types of such proofs are discussed.

### Proof of Work and Mining

Proof of Work is the most common consensus algorithm type for
cryptocurrencies. It originated in Bitcoin, and this is how this
cryptocurrency works. To generate Proof of Work, a computer has to
solve a challenge. The challenge is a computationally heavy problem
which is hard to solve, but the solution is easy to verify. When a
computer on a Proof of Work based network finds a solution, it publishes
it along with the transactions that the computer observed while
cracking the problem. The owner of this computer collects the transaction
fees and a reward for generating a block. The entire process is called
_mining_. Mining is very energy-consuming and its increase is
analogous to competitiveness.

### Proof of Stake and Minting

Proof of Stake is a novel approach to block generation. IOHK scientists
led by [Prof. Aggelos Kiayias](https://iohk.io/team/aggelos-kiayias/)
have designed the first provably secure proof of stake algorithm called
Ouroboros. Ouroboros lies at the heart of Cardano SL. Research team has
published a
[whitepaper](https://iohk.io/research/papers/a-provably-secure-proof-of-stake-blockchain-protocol/)
that is a worthy read for anyone with a background in cryptocurrency
theory. The core idea of Proof of Stake is that instead of wasting
electricity on cracking computationally heavy problems, a node is
selected to mint a new block, with a probability proportional
to the amount of coins a particular node has. If a node has positive (> 0)
[stake](/cardano/proof-of-stake/#stake), it is called _a stakeholder_.
If a node eventually becomes chosen to mint block,
it is called _a slotleader_. You can read more about this process in
[Proof of Stake in Cardano SL](/cardano/proof-of-stake/).

## Beyond Settlement Layer

[//]: # (<2017-02-20>)

Cardano SL is called a "Layer" for a reason. It's the first component of
the Cardano Platform. Eventually it will be expanded with a Control Layer,
serving as a trusted computation framework to evaluate a special
kind of proofs to ensure that a certain computation was carried out
correctly. In gaming and gambling, such systems are useful for
verifying honesty of random number generation and game
outcomes. Accompanied with side chains it will make possible to accomplish
such tasks as provably fair distribution of winnings in games. The
application of Control Layer lies well beyond gaming and gambling. Identity
management, credit system and more will be a part of Cardano Platform.
We are also aiming to evolve Daedalus, which is the Cardano SL wallet
application, into a universal cryptocurrency wallet featuring automated
cryptocurrency trading and cryptocurrency-to-fiat transactions.
