---
layout: default
title: Explorer
permalink: /cardano/explorer/
group: cardano
---
[//]: # (Reviewed at a6a1cdf72c7e167a13f500c0679c01fe4cfa0ca8)

# Cardano SL Explorer

This is an overview of Cardano SL Explorer service (hereafter just Explorer).

Explorer is an [online service](https://cardanoexplorer.com/) for searching addresses,
transactions, epochs and slots on the Cardano network.

## Address

We can find an info about users' addresses. After inserting address' hash we'll see:

1. Number of transactions related to this address.
2. Final balance on this address.
3. QR-code associated with this address.

Example of address' hash: `1fhXcTriF8i8FFSdCTaU9d3yp3oCLFQhon5KBkevT8rQDPP`.

## Transaction

We can find an info about transactions. After inserting transaction's id we'll see:

1. Transaction's date and time.
2. Address-source of this transaction.
3. Address-destination of this transaction.
4. ADA-amount transferred within this transaction.
5. Transaction fee.

Example of transaction's id: `fe0681c7fe20c27071befc329caac059bb183afaf68b9595744c52125c61cf68`.

## Time

We can find and info about transaction by the time as well. Now it's possible to
specify [epoch](/glossary/#epoch) and [slot](/glossary/#slot) only. After inserting 
epoch's index and slot's index we'll see:

1. Number of transactions for this slot.
2. Total amount transferred during this slot.
3. Size of the block generated within this slot.

### Slot

It's possible to get an info about particular slot. After inserting slot's hash we'll see:

1. Number of transaction for this slot.
2. Total output value.
3. Estimated volume.
4. Fees.
5. Slot's id.

Furthermore, we'll see hashes info:

1. This slot's hash.
2. Previous slot's hash (if exists).
3. Next slot's hash (if exists).
4. Merkle root.
